
# Multivariate continuous distributions

Challenges in Civil engineering and Geosciences involve working in data scarce scenarios (epistemic uncertainty) with natural phenomena of stochastic nature (aleatoric uncertainty). Univariate continuous distributions assists us in modelling the uncertainty of a variable to later include that uncertainty in the decision-making process or risk analysis, between others. However, these problems are typically complex and, usually, they involve more than one variable. For instance, when assessing the algae bloom in a water body different variables need to be considered, such as the amount of nutrients in the water (nitrogen and phosphorus), the dissolved oxigen in the water or the temperature of the water body. Sometimes (although not frequently) these variables are not related to each other, so we can consider them independent. However, frequently, these variables are generated by the same drivers and, thus, they are dependent to each other. For intance, the algae bloom is influenced by the temperature and availability of nutrients, but also the availability of nutrients can be influenced by the temperature of water. Therefore, there can be a relationship between those variables that we need to consider in an accurate analysis. There is where multivariate probability distributions are helpful as they allow us to model the distribution of not only one variable but several at the same time thus accounting for their dependence.

## Revisiting correlation

Probabilistic dependence between random variables is usually quantified through correlation coefficients. Previous, you have already been introduced to the concept of [correlation](correl) and Pearson correlation coefficient, which is given by

$$ 
\rho(X_1,X_2)=\frac{Cov(X_1,X_2)}{\sigma_{X_1} \sigma_{X_2}} 
$$ 

where $X_1$ and $X_2$ are two random variables, $Cov(X_1,X_2)$ is their covariance, and $\sigma_{X_1}$ and $\sigma_{X_2}$ are the standard deviations of $X_1$ and $X_2$. $-1 \leq \rho(X_1,X_2) \leq 1$, being $\rho(X_1,X_2)=-1$ a perfect negative linear correlation, and $\rho(X_1,X_2)=1$ a perfect positive linear correlation. If $\rho(X_1,X_2) \to 0$, we say that $X_1$ and $X_2$ are independent[^note]. This is, that having information about $X_1$ does not provide us with information about $X_2$. The interactive element below allows you to play around with the correlation value yourself. Observe how the distribution's density contours, or the scattered data, changes when you adapt the correlation value.

<iframe src="../_static/elements/element_correlation.html" width="600" height="400" frameborder="0"></iframe>

[^note]: That is an intuituve definition of independence. For a more formal definition of independence, visit the next page of the chapter.